## Changing Organizations

> One reason people insist that you use the proper channels to change things
> is because they have control of the proper channels
> and they're confident it won't work.
>
> - [Jon Stone](https://twitter.com/joncstone/status/1269961630940631041)

1.  **Be sure this is where you want to focus your efforts.**
    It's going to take years,
    it could well fail,
    and there are many other things you could do,
    so be sure this particular change is the one you want to fight for.

2.  **Ask those who will be affected.**
    *Nihil pro nobis sine nobis* (nothing for us, without us) is always a good motto,
    and asking for opinions often reveals potential allies.

3.  **Be specific.**
    Few people would argue in public against fair hiring practices,
    but the organization has to implement something specific in order for that to mean anything,
    and people very well might argue against those specifics.
    You should therefore pick something specific and achievable
    and make a concrete plan for achieving it.
    And start with whatever is likely to have broadest support,
    because success breeds success.

4.  **Figure out who actually has the power to make that change and what they actually care about.**
    Your neighbors don't make policy for your local public school:
    school board trustees do, so that's who you need to influence.
    Help someone who wants the same change as you get elected,
    or help someone who doesn't oppose your change with something they care about in exchange for support for your cause,
    but whatever you do, do it for the people whose vote counts.
    Conversely, figure out who is going to be negatively impacted by the change you want
    and what you can do to help them:
    for example,
    if it's going to eliminate jobs,
    what else can those people usefully do?

5.  **Build alliances,**
    because "I'll help you if you'll help me" makes the world go around.
    It's hard when people want the same thing for very different reasons,
    but this rule is *not* cynical:
    people whose beliefs are aligned may still have different priorities.
    (The flip side of this rule is to accept that some people will never be your allies:
    if everyone wanted it, you wouldn't have to push for the change.)
    People who want the same thing you do,
    who have a high profile (either inside your group or externally),
    or who have a wide range of connections are all useful allies.

6.  **Test the waters.**
    At every stage, refine your idea and presentation in front of a small group first.
    But remember:
    when done honestly,
    "refining your idea" sometimes means accepting that you wanted the wrong thing.
    And note that it can be useful to ask someone to be the official skeptic:
    giving them a way to critique in private may temper their public criticism,
    and you just might convert them.

7.  **Keep it visible.**
    It's easy to start a blog and create a Twitter account,
    but that very ease has reduced these channels' impact.
    Is there a newsletter you can be included in (which makes you look more official)?
    Can you make a presentation as part of some other event (rather than organizing a gathering of your own)?
    Can you get someone with a higher profile to mention what you're doing and point people your way?
    Can you post notices in the lunchroom? The elevator? The washrooms? Local restaurants?
    Some people will do things for t-shirts and stickers that they won't do for money...
    And always share a single point of contact that someone actually checks (frequently).

8.  **Collect data but tell stories.**
    Sooner or later someone is going to ask what financial impact this change is going to have,
    so be ready for that.
    Data about other changes or from other organizations helps a lot,
    but data doesn't have nearly as powerful an impact as stories.
    Don't explain what *kind* of people this will help:
    explain how it helped a specific person,
    or how it would make a specific person's life better.
    And if you've never cried when telling that story,
    tell a better story.

9.  **Learn how to run meetings and make decisions.**
    You can get the change you want without being a great public speaker,
    but you *must* know how to [run a meeting]({{ '/2018/05/11/meetings/' | relative_url }})
    and [make decisions]({{ '/2019/06/13/marthas-rules/' | relative_url }}).

10. **Celebrate when you can, grieve when you need to.**
    [Burnout]({{ '/2015/11/09/daddy-why-dont-you-ever-laugh/' | relative_url }})
    is an occupational hazard for everyone trying to make meaningful change,
    in part because we get so used to doing things on our own at the start
    that we don't share the load even when there are people to share it with.
    Not all of your allies will become your friends,
    but those who do will be able to share your victories
    and commiserate with your defeats like no one else.

## Talking People Into Things

I don't always exhibit good judgment, but I *am* pretty good at talking people
into things.  Here are ten simple rules for doing it that I hope you will only
use for good.

**1. Don't.**

If you have to talk someone into something, odds are that they don't really want
to do it.  Respect that: it's almost always better in the long run to leave some
particular thing undone than to use guilt or any underhanded psychological
tricks that will only engender resentment.

**2. Be kind.**

I don't know if there actually is a book called "Secret Tricks of the Ninja
Sales Masters", but if there is, it probably tells readers that doing something
for a potential customer creates a sense of obligation, which in turn increases
the odds of a sale.  That may work, but (a) it only works once and (b) it's a
skeezy thing to do.  If, on the other hand, you are genuinely kind, and help
other people because it's what good people do, you just might inspire them to be
good people too.

**3. Appeal to the greater good.**

If you open by talking about what's in it for them, you are signalling that they
should think of their interaction with you as a commercial exchange of value to
be bargained over.  Instead, start by explaining how whatever you want them to
help with is going to make the world a better place, and *mean it*.  (If what
you're proposing *isn't* going to make the world a better place, propose
something better.)

**4. Start small.**

Most people are understandably reluctant to dive into things head-first, so give
them a chance to test the waters and to get to know you and everyone else
involved in whatever it is you want help with.  Don't be surprised or
disappointed if that's where things end: everyone is busy or tired or has
projects of their own, or maybe just has a different mental model of how
collaboration is supposed to work.  Remember the 90-9-1 rule (90% of people will
watch, 9% will speak up, and 1% will actually do things) and set your
expectations accordingly.

**5. Don't build a project: build a community.**

I used to belong to a baseball team that never actually played baseball: our
"games" were just an excuse for us to hang out and enjoy each other's company.
If you actually want to accomplish something, you probably don't want to go
quite that far, but sharing a cup of tea with someone or celebrating the birth
of their first grandchild can get you things that no reasonable amount of money
can.

**6. Establish a point of connection.**

"I was speaking to X" or "we met at Y" gives them context, which in turn makes
them more comfortable.  This must be specific: spammers and cold-callers have
trained us all to ignore anything that starts, "I recently came across your
website".

**7. Be specific about what you are asking for.**

People need to know this so that they can figure out whether the time and skills
they have are a match for what you need.  Being realistic up front is also a
sign of respect: if you tell people you need a hand moving a few boxes when
you're actually packing up an entire house, they're probably not going to come
back.

**8. Establish your credibility.**

Mention your backers, your size, how long your group has been around, or
something that you've accomplished in the past so that they'll believe you're
worth taking seriously.

**9. Create a slight sense of urgency.**

"We're hoping to launch this in the spring" is more likely to get a positive
response than "We'd eventually like to launch this."  However, the word "slight"
is also important: if your request is urgent, most people will assume you're
disorganized or that something has gone wrong, and may then err on the side of
prudence.

**10. Take a hint.**

If the first person you ask for help says "no", ask someone else.  If the fifth
or the tenth person says "no", ask yourself if what you're trying to do makes
sense and is worth doing.
