Tooling {#s:tooling}
=======

A carpenter shows up to put an extension on your house, and all he's
brought with him is a hammer and a Swiss army knife. How confident are
you that he'll be able to do the job?

A programmer shows up to fix a couple of memory leaks and add a new
splash screen to your application, and all she's going to use are a
plain-text editor and a compiler. Are you any more confident in her
ability to do the job in a reasonable time?

Tools don't just help us do things more easily; they shape what we
consider possible, and encourage some working practices while
discouraging others. They also advertise how seriously we take our
craft: people who want to be good at something are willing to invest
time in learning how to do it better, and in programming, that means
mastering new tools and the practices that go with them.

I actually believe that processes are more important than tools, but
that's because I know how to use whatever tools I have at hand to
support the working practices I think are most productive. However, I
tell students that tools are more important than processes because tools
are more tangible: it's easier to tell if someone is using version
control or ticketing than it is to tell if they're designing or
estimating sensibly.

So here, in more-or-less priority order, are the tools you should use in
your project.

Version Control {#s:tooling-versioning}
---------------

Version control is the collective memory of the project. It's what lets
you move files from one machine to another without clobbering stuff you
just spent three hours writing, and without worrying about whether you
forgot an all-important file. It's also what lets you undo your
mistakes: if you spend an hour or two going down the wrong path, and
want to get back to where you were, version control lets you do it
reliably with a single command. And if all that wasn't enough, version
control lets you keep track of who did what, so that you can allocate
credit and blame where they're due.

Dozens of version control systems exist. For many years, CVS was the
workhorse of the open source world, and very popular in commercial
projects as well. It has now largely been replaced by Subversion, which
fixes many of CVS's flaws (while introducing a few minor ones of its
own). Alternatively, if you have money to spend, there's Perforce, which
is my personal favorite.

These three, and most others, all have the same general architecture.
The master copy of the project resides in a *repository*, which is
located on a server
(FigureÂ [\[f:version-control-architecture\]](#f:version-control-architecture){reference-type="ref"
reference="f:version-control-architecture"}). No one ever edits the
repository files directly; instead, each member of the team keeps a
*working copy* on her machine. When she wants to share her work with her
teammates, she *commits* her files, which copies any changes she has
made to the repository. She can also *update* her working copy, which
copies changes other people have committed to the repository into her
working copy.

What happens when two or more people change the same file at the same
time? One or the other will commit first; her changes will go into the
repository. When the second person tries to commit, though, the version
control system notices the *conflict*, and gives him three options:

1.  Throw away his work.

2.  Throw away what his teammate has done.

3.  *Merge* the changes, i.e., go through the conflicts and decide what
    to keep or rewrite.

Version control means never having to say you're sorry: since the
repository keeps a record of all the changes ever checked in, any
developer who wants to can *revert* to earlier versions of files.

Using a version control system is one of the things that distinguishes
professional programmers from amateurs. Yes, you can share files by
mailing them back and forth, or copying them from one laptop to another
over wireless or with a USB stick. But why would you? A version control
system will do all the hard work for you, and get it right every time.

The only drawback of version control systems is that they work best with
plain text files---most of them don't really know what to do with binary
files, such as sound clips, images, or Microsoft Word documents. When
changes have been made to a Java source file, for example, Subversion
can find and display the lines that have been edited. When you and your
teammates all edit the Word version of your final report during the same
boring lecture, on the other hand, all Subversion can do is tell you
that the files have been changed---it can't find and highlight the
changes for you. This isn't really its fault: there are hundreds of
different binary file formats, and most don't come with tools for
diffing (i.e., finding differences) or merging. Still, programmers'
heavy use of version control is one of the things that keeps them in the
ASCII dark ages.

Editor {#s:tooling-editor}
------

The next most important tool after a version control system is your
editor. There are literally thousands to choose from; if you want a
plain text editor, your choices range from the very small (such as Pico,
which is included in most Linux installations) to the very large (like
Emacs, whose name doesn't actually stand for "eighty megabytes and
constantly swapping", and which isn't actually a Lisp-based operating
system in disguise). There are also editors that understand the syntax
of particular file formats, and can automatically indent text, complete
phrases, and colorize the stuff you're typing: JEdit for Java, Amaya for
HTML, and many others. Finally, there are WYSIWYG tools like Microsoft
Word and OpenOffice; these usually *can't* be used for programming,
since they insert non-ASCII characters and formatting information in
files (even files that look unformatted).

You probably already have a favorite editor. If you're like most
programmers, you will change jobs, languages, operating systems, and
nationality before you'll switch to another, because it's taken weeks or
months for your hands to master the current one. However, if your editor
doesn't pass the following tests, switching now will save you enough
time and grief in the future to make the temporary loss of productivity
worthwhile:

Programming Language {#s:tooling-lang}
--------------------

Programmers have fought religious wars[^24] over "what's the best
programming language" for as long as there have *been* programming
languages. In my experience, which one you use makes a lot less
difference than most people think...

...as long as you use the right one, that is. Fifteen years ago, there
was a pretty clear tradeoff between how quickly you can get a program
running[^25], and how fast was when it ran. Scripting languages like
Perl optimized programmers' time; low-level languages like C optimized
the machine's.

Today, the balance has shifted in favor of higher-level languages. One
reason is that modern microprocessors are so complex that only a handful
of human beings can out-code optimizing compilers. Another reason is
that just-in-time compilers and generational garbage collection have
made higher-level languages intrinsically faster. The biggest, though,
is that the execution time of modern applications depends less on
squeezing cycles out of processors than it used to. The bottleneck in a
dynamic web site is almost always network latency or the time required
to perform database operations; your code probably accounts for only a
few percent of the total, so doubling or tentupling its speed has less
effect than you'd think.

People still argue the merits of statically-typed and dynamically-typed
languages, though. Java vs. Python, C\# vs. Ruby, mustard vs. ketchup...
I personally prefer the latter, but I don't know of any hard evidence
from empirical studies showing that any is better. In practice, you'll
usually make this choice based on what the instructor tells you to use,
what you already know, and what gives you access to libraries you need.

If you *do* have a choice, keep in mind that dynamically-typed
interpreted languages (like Python, Ruby, Visual Basic, and Perl) are
better suited to building little tools and programming aides than
statically-typed compiled languages (like C++, Java, and C\#). Since
multilingual projects are harder to manage than unilingual ones, this
ought to bias you in favor of the former. On the other hand, there are a
lot more commercial-grade tools for the second group of languages, and
even today, a lot more documentation.

Builder {#s:tooling-builder}
-------

No matter what language you use, you're going to need a builder---a tool
that will transform what you've typed into what you want to deliver. The
best-known builder in the Unix world is Make, which was invented in 1975
by a summer intern at Bell Labs[^26]. In order to use Make, you create a
configuration file that specifies the dependencies between the files in
your project, and the commands needed to update them. For example:

`game.exe``\ `{=latex}`:``\ `{=latex}`game.bc``\ `{=latex}`graphics.bc``\ `{=latex}`utils.bc`\
`tx``\ `{=latex}`-E``\ `{=latex}`-o``\ `{=latex}`game.exe``\ `{=latex}`game.bc``\ `{=latex}`graphics.bc``\ `{=latex}`utils.bc`

`%.bc``\ `{=latex}`:``\ `{=latex}`%.grace`\
`tx``\ `{=latex}`-C``\ `{=latex}$<
\end{alltt}

\noindent tells Make that {\tt game.exe} can't be built until
{\tt game.bc}, {\tt graphics.bc}, and {\tt utils.bc} exist, and
that once they do, the way to create {\tt game.exe} is to run the
{\tt tx} compiler with several options.  Below that is a
\emph{pattern rule} telling Make how to create any {\tt .bc}
file from a {\tt .grace} file with the same root name; the cryptic
expression {\tt \$<} is Make's way of saying ``the first thing
the target depends on''.

Make was invented to recompile programs, but it can be used for
a lot more.  Here, for example, is a configuration file that updates a
web site:

\begin{alltt}
SRC_DIR =$`HOME``/webstuff`\
`DST_DST``\ `{=latex}`=``\ `{=latex}`/www/personal/gvwilson`

`SRC_FILES``\ `{=latex}`=``\ `{=latex}$(wildcard$`SRC``/*.html)``\ `{=latex}$(wildcard$`SRC``/*.png)`\
`DST_FILES``\ `{=latex}`=``\ `{=latex}$(subst$`SRC``,`${DST},$`SRC_FILES``)`

`all``\ `{=latex}`:``\ `{=latex}${DST\_FILES}$`DST``/%.html``\ `{=latex}`:``\ `{=latex}${SRC}/\%.html
        replace AUTHOR=''Greg Wilson'' DATE=''$`DATE``â``\ `{=latex}$<$`@`

${DST}/\%.png :$`SRC``/%.png`\
`cp``\ `{=latex}$<$`@`

This says that the source files are all the `.html` pages and `.png`
images in my `webstuff` directory. Whenever I change an HTML page, I
want the `AUTHOR` and `DATE` fields replaced with appropriate values as
the file is copied to my web site. If a PNG image changes, it should be
copied over unchanged (since treating the bytes in a PNG as ASCII
characters will almost certainly result in an unreadable image).

Make has been used by hundreds of thousands of programmers for more than
thirty years, but has some fundamental flaws. The first, as you can see,
is its syntax. The second is that it runs commands by handing them over
to whatever operating system it is running on, which make portability a
constant headache. (Quick, should you use `rm` or `del` to delete a
file?) Third, Make doesn't have a debugger: the only way to track down
problems in your build configuration is to stare at the configuration
file until little drops of blood form on your forehead.

Newer builders like Ant try to fix the first two problems by using XML
for their configuration file syntax, and by providing a library of
commands for programmers to call (which Ant then translates into
operating system calls as necessary). Ant is now widely used in the Java
world, and clones like NAnt are popular as well, but its XML syntax is
still pretty ugly, and it still doesn't have a real debugger.

Now, I could live with ugly syntax---if Ie kan lurn Inglish speling, Ie
kan lurn eneething. But the lack of a debugger is a never-ending
headache, because real build systems aren't just configured: they're
programmed. Take the HTML notes for the course I'm currently teaching,
for example: at 341 lines, the Makefile that checks the consistency of
cross-references, makes sure all the bibliography citations are in
place, updates the license, and copies files to my web site is more
complex than many programs I've written. Thinking of it as a
"configuration" file is a mistake: you *have* to approach system builds
as a programming problem. This means that every build system eventually
turns into a small programming language, which is why James Duncan
Davidson, the inventor of Ant, wrote in 2004:

> If I knew then what I know now, I would have tried using a real
> scripting language, such as JavaScript via the Rhino component or
> Python via JPython, with bindings to Java objects which implemented
> the functionality expressed in todays tasks. Then, there would be a
> first class way to express logic and we wouldn't be stuck with XML as
> a format that is too bulky for the way that people really want to use
> the tool.

The next generation of builders are therefore almost certainly going to
dispense with custom configuration file syntaxes, and be layered on top
of dynamic languages like Python and Ruby. SCons and Rake are examples
of such a system: its users write their "configurations" as small Python
or Ruby programs, making use of an extensive support library that
handles dependencies, invokes appropriate compilers, and so on.
Debugging is still problematic, but at least it's possible.

Whatever you choose (or are told to use), stick to the following rules:

-   *Pick something that plays nicely with your other tools.* Most Java
    editors and IDEs (SectionÂ [6.6](#s:tooling-ide){reference-type="ref"
    reference="s:tooling-ide"}) integrate with Ant, so that you can (for
    example) jump directly to compilation errors when they occur.

-   *Always use the builder---never compile or copy things by hand.*
    This isn't just for efficiency's sake: if any of the twelve things
    you need to do to get your application up on your web site have to
    be done by hand, the odds are that you'll forget a crucial step
    right before your end-of-term demo, and wind up looking silly.

-   *Always use the builder---never compile or copy things by hand.*
    Yes, I know I'm repeating myself, but this time the reason is
    different. If you do something by hand, one of your teammates might
    do it differently. "But it works on my machine!" isn't something you
    want to hear an hour before a deadline...

A good way to start using a builder is to create a "version zero" of the
project. Set up the build and make sure it works even when there isn't
anything to compile, run, test, or copy. Now add something---anything.
Does the build still work? If it does, you're on your way.

Once you've got that, *never check anything into version control that
breaks the build*. This is one of the golden rules of working in a team:
if your code won't compile, or doesn't pass whatever automated tests you
have, then putting it into the repository means putting every other
person on your team into exactly the same broken state you're in. When
you're working on your own, it's OK to use version control as a way to
transfer files from one machine to another, or as a way to back things
up at the end of the day. Do *not* carry this habit over to teamwork.

Debugger {#s:tooling-debugger}
--------

A *symbolic debugger* is a program that allows you to control and
inspect the execution of another program. You can step through the
target program a line at a time, display the values of variables or
expressions, look at the call stack, or (my personal favorite) set
*breakpoints* to say "pause the program when it reaches this line"
(FigureÂ [\[f:debugger\]](#f:debugger){reference-type="ref"
reference="f:debugger"}). Depending on the language you're using, you
may have to compile your program with certain options turned on to make
it debuggable, but that's a small price to pay for the hours or days a
debugger can save you when you're trying to track down a problem.

Some debuggers, like GDB, are standalone programs; others are build into
IDEs (SectionÂ [6.6](#s:tooling-ide){reference-type="ref"
reference="s:tooling-ide"}). Both are better than adding `print`
statements to your program, recompiling it, and re-running it, because:

-   adding `print` statements takes longer than clicking on a line and
    setting a breakpoint;

-   adding `print` statements distorts the code you're debugging by
    moving things around in memory, altering the flow of control, and/or
    changing the timing of thread execution; and

-   it's all too easy to make a mistake in the `print` statement---few
    things are as frustrating as wasting an afternoon debugging a
    problem, only to realize that the `print` statement you copied and
    pasted isn't displaying the values you thought it was.

A company I used to work for never hired people immediately. Instead,
prospective employees were put on a three-month contract. This gave us a
chance to see how well they worked, and them a chance to see if they
actually wanted to work with us.

Two things meant automatic disqualification in the assessment at the end
of those three months: checking broken code into version control, and
using `print` statements instead of a symbolic debugger. The first was
justified because we didn't want to hire people who put themselves ahead
of their teammates. The second was justified because we didn't want to
hire people who were too stupid or stubborn to program efficiently.

Over the years, I've been surprised by how strongly some programmers
resist using a debugger. The reason can't be the five or ten minutes it
takes to learn how to use one---that pays for itself almost immediately.
The only explanation I've been able to come up with is that some people
*enjoy* being inefficient. Typing in `print` statements and paging
through screens of output lets them feel like they're being productive,
when in fact they're just being busy (which isn't the same thing at
all). If your brain needs a break (which it sometimes will), then take a
break: stretch your legs, stare out a window, practice your juggling, or
do whatever else you can to take your mind away from your problem for a
few minutes. Don't drag out the process of finding and fixing your bug
by using sloppy technique just to let your brain idle for a while.

And by the way: if you're allowed to choose your teammates at the start
of the course, treat it like a job interview. Ask the people you think
you might want to work with whether they use a debugger. If they say
"no", ask yourself what impact that's going to have on your grade in the
course...

IDE {#s:tooling-ide}
---

A smart editor, a build system, and a debugger, all talking to one
another: that's a pretty good description of an *integrated development
environment*, or IDE. These were invented in the 1970s, but didn't
really catch on until Borland released Turbo Pascal in the 1980s[^27].
Along with the tools described above, modern IDEs usually include:

-   a *code browser* that displays an overview of the packages, classes,
    methods, and data in your program;

-   a *GUI designer* that lets you build GUIs by dragging and dropping
    components;

-   an *interactive prompt* so that you can type in expressions or call
    functions and see the results without having to start (or restart)
    your program;

-   a *style checker* that can warn you when your code doesn't meet
    naming and indentation conventions;

-   some *refactoring tools* to help you reorganize your code; and

-   a *test runner* to display the results of tests, and let you jump
    directly to ones that have failed.

In short, an IDE is to programming what a well-equipped workbench is to
a carpenter. The most popular one among open source developers is
undoubtedly Eclipse , which has hundreds of plugins of varying quality
to support database design, reverse engineering, a dozen different
programming languages, and more. Microsoft Visual Studio is still my
personal favorite, largely because of how well its debugger handles
multithreaded programs; as of May 2007, the Express Edition is still
free.

There are dozens of others, any of which will make you more productive
than their disconnected counterparts. Since most of these store project
data (including build instructions) in a proprietary format, your team
will do much better if you all adopt the same IDE. This will also let
you help one another solve problems and share plugins[^28].

Ticketing {#s:tooling-ticketing}
---------

You probably have a to-do list somewhere. It might be scribbled in a
calendar or lab notebook, kept in a text file on your laptop, or in your
head; wherever and however you maintain it, it lists the things you're
supposed to do, when they're due, and (possibly) how urgent they are.

At its simplest, a *ticketing system* is a shared to-do list. Ticketing
systems are also called *bug trackers*, because most software projects
use one to keep track of the bugs that developers and users find. These
days, ticketing systems are almost invariably web-based. To create a new
ticket, you enter a title and a short description; the system then
assigns it a unique serial number
(FigureÂ [\[f:ticketing\]](#f:ticketing){reference-type="ref"
reference="f:ticketing"}). You can usually also specify:

-   who is responsible for the ticket (e.g., who's supposed to fix the
    bug, or test the fix, or update the documentation);

-   what kind of ticket it is (a bug report, a request for a new
    feature, a question to be answered, or some other task);

-   how important it is; and

-   when it's due.

If version control keeps track of where your project has been, your
ticketing system keeps track of where you're going. After version
control, ticketing is therefore the most essential part of a team
project. Without it, you and your teammates will have to constantly ask
each other "What are you working on?", "What am I supposed to be working
on?", and "Who was supposed to do that?" Once you start using one, on
the other hand, it's easy to find out what the project's status is: just
look at the open tickets, and at those that have been closed recently.
You can use this to create agendas for your status meetings
(SectionÂ [2.1](#s:important-meetings){reference-type="ref"
reference="s:important-meetings"}), and to remind yourself what you were
doing three months ago when the time comes to write your final report
(SectionÂ [8.3](#s:wrapup-report){reference-type="ref"
reference="s:wrapup-report"}).

Of course, a ticketing system is only as useful as what you put into it.
If you're describing a bug in a large application, you should include
enough information to allow someone[^29] to reproduce the problem, and
someone else to figure out how urgent the bug is, who should work on it,
and what other parts of the application might be affected by a fix. This
is why industrial-strength ticketing systems like Bugzilla have upwards
of two dozen fields per ticket to record:

-   what version of the software you were using
    (SectionÂ [7.4](#s:design-numbering){reference-type="ref"
    reference="s:design-numbering"});

-   what platform it was running on;

-   what you did to make it crash;

-   any data or configuration files the program relies on;

-   whatever stack traces, error reports, or log messages the program
    produced (SectionÂ [7.5](#s:design-logging){reference-type="ref"
    reference="s:design-logging"});

-   its severity (i.e., how much damage the bug might do);

-   its priority (how urgently the bug needs to be fixed); and

-   other tickets that might be related.

This is a lot more information than student projects require. In
addition, students are almost always working on several courses at once,
and it's common for students to have to put their team project aside for
a few days to work on assignments for other courses. For these reasons,
I've found that most student teams won't actually use anything more
sophisticated than a web-base to-do list unless they're forced to by the
course's grading scheme. In that case, most come away with the
impression that tickets are something you only use when you have to,
rather than a vital team coordination tool.

Other Ways to Communicate {#s:tooling-communicate}
-------------------------

Tickets are the best way to keep track of where you are, but there are
lots of other ways the team can and should communicate. The most popular
is easily *email*, which has been used to run projects since the 1970s.
It brings content directly to people while allowing everyone to deal
with issues when it's convenient for them, and supports long-running
conversations. Email really comes into its own, though, when messages
are routed through a central mailing list, so that people don't have to
remember to CC the other five people on their team, and a shared archive
can be created for later searching. The second point is as important as
the first: if you can't go back and find out what was said a month
ago---or, just as importantly, if someone *else* can't do that---you
might as well not have said it.

*Wikis* seem like a good way to keep notes, create documentation, and so
on. Their strengths are a syntax that's (a little) simpler than HTML,
and the fact that content is automatically and immediately visible on
the web. In practice, you'll probably get as much mileage out of a bunch
of HTML pages under version control---you have to set up a repository
anyway, and version control systems are much better at reconciling
conflicts between concurrent authors than wikis.

*Blogs*, on the other hand, have proven more useful. One kind of project
blog consists of articles written by the team's members as a journal of
their progress. This is most useful for people who are watching the
project from the outside, like instructors.

The second kind of blog is one created automatically by tools. In
DrProject, for example, every project has a blog called its *event log*.
Every time someone checks code into version control, creates or closes a
ticket, or sends email, an entry is added to the event log. This allows
the project's members to see changes scroll by in their usual blog
reader, which is a handy way to keep track of what their teammates are
doing.

The problem with blogs, at least right now, is that the RSS
standard[^30] that blogging relies on does not provide for
authentication: there's no uniform way for blog readers to pass
credentials like passwords to blog sites. In practice, this means that
blogs have to be open for everyone to read. This is OK for open source
projects, but it's problematic for students, since instructors usually
don't want Team A to be able to see what Team B is doing, and vice
versa. Emerging standards like OpenID may eventually solve this problem,
but for now, per-project blogs are something that instructors have to
think about very carefully.

Finally, there's *instant messaging*. I realize it's the communication
medium of choice for all you hip young things, but I'm not a fan:

1.  IM is the most effective method ever invented for disrupting the
    state of flow that is so essential to productivity
    (SectionÂ [2.3](#s:important-time){reference-type="ref"
    reference="s:important-time"}).

2.  Most chat systems don't provide "always-on" chat rooms (IRC being a
    notable exception), so every time you want to talk to all your
    teammates, you have to round them up.

3.  Most IM systems don't archive conversations in the way that mailing
    lists do, so participants have to save the chat on their personal
    machines, then upload it to the project's site. In my experience,
    that's just enough trouble for most people to never get around to
    doing it...

4.  IM conversations tend to be permanently out of phase: if you ask,
    "Can we move on to the next item?", and someone doesn't say either
    "yes" or "no", what usually happens is that you wait a minute, then
    move on, and then they pop up with a lengthy comment on the
    preceding item.

I think these faults can all be fixed, but until they are---oh, who am I
kidding? You're going to use IM no matter what I say. If there's more
than two people in the conversation, follow the same rules you would for
a meeting. In particular, post a summary of the conversation to your
project's web site, just as you would post meeting minutes. And if you
want to figure out how to make IM a productivity enhancer, please send
me email: I'm always looking for good graduate students.

Portals {#s:tooling-portal}
-------

All of which brings us to project management portals, which do for
groupware what IDEs do for desktop tools. The best-known by far is
SourceForge, which hosts over a hundred thousand open source
projects[^31], but there are many others to choose from, such as Google
Code. A portal typically provides a read-only view[^32] of the project's
version control repository with a ticketing system, a wiki, mailing
lists, blogs, and other odds and ends.

Portals are attractive because setting up one system that does all of
these things is a lot less work than setting up one system for each. In
addition, each tool becomes more powerful when it can easily be used
with others: if tickets can easily link to change sets in version
control, which can link to wiki pages, which can link to email messages,
each piece of information becomes more valuable.

Most portals are either too heavyweight for undergraduate projects, or
lack features that undergraduate courses need[^33]. Trac is a flawed
exception: it does most of the things student teams want, but can only
handle one project per installation, and doesn't offer mailing lists. We
forked[^34] Trac in 2005 to create DrProject, a portal that specifically
addresses these needs; if your instructor hasn't already picked
something out for your course, take a look at
`http://www.drproject.org`.

The Next Level {#s:tooling-next}
--------------

You and your teammates could use many other tools to make yourselves
more productive. Some aren't part of the standard undergraduate
curriculum yet, even though good developers have been relying on them
for a decade or more. Others may be touched on, but only briefly, so a
quick recap won't hurt.

The first is a *documentation generator* like Javadoc. This is a
compiler of a sort, but instead of translating source code into
something executable, it extracts information from specially-formatted
comments and strings, and turns it into human-readable documentation.
The justification for this is that when code and documentation are
stored separately, programmers won't keep the latter up to date. Since
"rusty" documentation can be worse than no documentation at all, it
makes a lot of sense to keep the source of the documentation right
beside the code[^35]. Many introductory courses require students to
document their packages, classes, and methods this way; it's a good
habit, and one you should cultivate.

Another tool you should be fanatical about is some kind of *test
harness* that can re-run your tests for you at the push of a button. I
won't repeat the arguments in favor of test-driven development
(SectionÂ [5.5](#s:process-tdd){reference-type="ref"
reference="s:process-tdd"}) here; suffice to say that while *you* won't
ever make silly mistakes, your teammates undoubtedly will, and testing
is your best way to prevent them from sinking your project.

The most widely used test harness today is JUnit[^36]. Programmers write
tests as methods, and group them together into classes. JUnit uses
*reflection* to find and execute the tests, keeping track of how many
pass, fail, or encounter unexpected errors (which usually indicate that
the test itself is broken, rather than the code under test). Every
modern Java IDE can run JUnit tests and display the results, typically
with a red bar if some tests are failing, or a green one if all have
passed.

Clones of JUnit exist for most major programming languages, as do
extensions of various kinds for testing web applications (HttpUnit),
databases (SqlUnit), and how systems behave under heavy load
(JUnitScenario). Whatever your project is building, there's probably a
JUnit extension to help you.

Along with testing frameworks, *style checkers* have become a lot more
popular since the turn of the century. Early style checkers looked at
code to make sure that it obeyed formatting rules, such as "no method
can be longer than 100 lines" or "class names must be written in
CamelCase". Today's, like PMD and CheckStyle, can do a lot more: they
can find code that is never called, parameters that are never used,
duplicated code that could be factored out, and a lot more.

Style checkers are more properly called *static analysis* tools, since
they work by parsing the source code for your programs and looking for
patterns that might indicate problems. Compilers also do a lot of static
analysis[^37]; the non-fatal warnings they produce are a lot more useful
than many students realize, and a "zero warnings" policy can prevent a
lot of subtle bugs.

Another class of tools uses *dynamic analysis*: they watch your program
run, and look for things like memory leaks, or inconsistent locking that
might lead to deadlocks or race conditions. FindBugs is the best-known
in the Java world; the Valgrind toolset is a lifesaver if you're using C
or C++.

All of these tools will do a lot more for you if you adopt some kind of
*continuous integration* system, such as CruiseControl or BuildBot.
These can be set up to run either at regular intervals (say, every hour,
or a three a.m.), or every time someone checks into version control
(which I find more useful). Each time they run, they check a fresh copy
of the project out of version control, build it, re-run all the tests,
and post the results to the project's blog, web site, and mailing list.
This acts as a "heartbeat" for the project: as soon as anything goes
wrong, everyone knows. It also encourages good development practices: if
someone checks something in that doesn't compile, run, or pass the
project's tests, everyone will know very quickly. Funnily enough, after
the system has shamed you a couple of times, you'll stop checking in
broken code...

Real development projects rely on a lot of other tools as well: schedule
builders like Microsoft Project, requirements tracing tools, visual
editors for GUIs and class diagrams, and so on. Most are bigger hammers
than undergraduate projects really require (except possibly the GUI
editors), so I'd like to close this section by asking you to invest some
time in something else: scripting. Good programmers don't just use
tools, they build them. I have dozens of small programs in my `tools`
directory that do things like update my working copies of all the
projects I'm involved in[^38] or check whether the links to Amazon.com
in my course notes are still valid. Anything worth doing repeatedly is
worth automating; if you and your teammates find yourselves typing in
the same commands over and over again, *write a program to do it for
you*. And please, use a language like Python or Ruby rather than Java or
C\#: the "try it and see" nature of the former is a lot better suited to
one-of-a-kind scripts than the latter's type checking and compilation.

You May Also Be Interested In... {#s:tooling-other}
--------------------------------

A complete working environment needs more than just software.
Unfortunately, most university labs seemed designed to make everything
below difficult or impossible to achieve.

-   *Peace and quiet.* Study after study has proved that this has more
    impact on productivity than a fast network, a fat disk, or caffeine,
    but most workplaces are still too crowded, too noisy, and filled
    with too many interrupts. As mentioned in
    SectionÂ [2.3](#s:important-time){reference-type="ref"
    reference="s:important-time"}, it takes most people ten minutes to
    get back into a state of flow after being distracted, which means
    that half a dozen interruptions per hour effectively renders someone
    zero percent effective. I know people say, "If I can't overhear what
    other people are talking about, I might miss something important,"
    but that only applies if the only people you're overhearing are
    members of your own team (and even then, it's a dubious claim).

-   *Comfortable seating.* A good chair with a firm back costs one fifth
    of what a mid-range PC does. A full-sized keyboard (I have large
    hands---most laptop keyboards force me to bend my wrists
    uncomfortably) costs fifty dollars, and a lamp with a soft-light
    bulb is another forty. The combination doesn't just let me program
    longer each day; it also helps ensure that I'll still be able to
    program five or ten years from now without chronic back and wrist
    pain. Compare this with what's in most computer labs: their lighting
    gives glare without illumination, the dark desktops make the optical
    mice jerky, and the low-budget chairs are guaranteed to make your
    lower back ache after an hour. In short, they look like the kind of
    places that get full-page spreads in architectural magazines; as
    [@b:brand-how-buildings-learn] points out, those are rarely
    comfortable places to work.

-   *A pad of gridded paper and several ballpoint pens.* I often make
    notes for myself when programming, or draw box-and-arrow diagrams of
    my data structures when debugging. I used to keep an editor open in
    a background window to do the former, but when my wrists started
    acting up, I discovered that taking my hands away from the keyboard
    for a few moments to scribble something down provided welcome
    relief. I also quickly discovered that the odds of me being able to
    read my own notes the next day rose dramatically if I used gridded
    paper to line them up.

-   *A heavy mug for coffee or tea.* I don't know why, but a styrofoam
    cup, or a normal teacup, just isn't as satisfying as a little
    hand-sized ceramic boulder. Maybe it satisfies my subconscious
    Neanderthal urge to club my computer to death when it misbehaves...

-   *A rubber duck.* One of computing's many apocryphal stories holds
    that someone---Brian Kernighan, maybe, or Dennis Ritchie---keeps a
    rubber duck next to his computer. Whenever a bug takes more than a
    few minutes to track down, he puts the duck on his desk and explains
    the problem to it. Why? Because speaking out loud forces you to
    marshal your thoughts, which in turn highlights any contradictions
    or missed steps that you hadn't noticed while everything was just
    swirling around inside your head.

-   *A squirt bottle of glass cleaner and a box of kleenex.* I can't
    stand smears on my screen. They drive me nuts. Whenever I'm showing
    something to someone, and they actually *touch my screen* instead of
    just pointing, I have another Neanderthal fantasy, except this time
    it's not subconscious...

-   *A chess set*, or a deck of cards, or some juggling balls. I'm a
    very bad chess player. Luckily, so are most people, so it's usually
    possible to find someone at my level for a ten-minute game at lunch.
    Other programmers I know play euchre, or knit---a programmers'
    "stitch and bitch" session can be jaw-dropping to listen to. Few
    people can focus for more than a few hours before their productivity
    drops; it's better to acknowledge this, and take a break in the
    middle of the day, than to say, "Must... keep... coding..." and
    produce garbage that just has to be rewritten later.

-   *Books.* You can find a lot on-line, but it's hard to google with
    your feet up on your desk, and even harder to fold down the corners
    on web pages. When I want API documentation, I use the web; when I
    want a tutorial, I still prefer the printed page. Right now, for
    example, I have [@b:berkun-art-proj-mgmt],
    [@b:doar-practical-dev-env], [@b:fogel-producing-open-source], and
    [@b:ely-marmot-understanding-offices] within reach.

-   *Running shoes.* Back when I was a part-time grad student, I had a
    settled routine: I brought three sets of gym gear to the office at
    the start of the week, worked out at lunchtime on Monday, Wednesday,
    and Friday, and took my stuff home at the end of the week. After two
    months of this, I came in to find that my co-workers had hung a
    little chandelier made of air fresheners over my desk. Since then,
    I've rented a locker at the gym, but I still try to get some
    exercise several times a week---it helps my concentration and
    stamina a lot more than any amount of coffee..

-   *Pictures.* Ah, the nesting instinct. Everyone wants to feel at
    home; everyone wants to make wherever they are uniquely theirs. I
    hang a few postcards on the wall wherever I work, along with a
    photograph of my wife and daughter taken ten hours after she was
    born (my daughter, that is), just to remind me what's really
    important.
